---
title: Introduction To Metadata Course
authors: Becky Oldroyd, Hayley Mills, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
---

# Introduction To Metadata Course 

Welcome to the **Introduction to Metadata** training course.

## What will can I learn from this course?

By the time you've completed the course you will...

- Interpret and apply the principles of research data management and FAIR data
- Define what metadata is and its relationship to research data
- Explain the role of metadata in aiding discovery, understanding and reuse of data
- Identify how metadata is used throughout the research lifecycle
- Know how to use metadata to search data and metadata catalogues effectively
- Know how to use metadata to asses data and it's relevance to your work
- Distinguish between good quality metadata and poor quality metadata
- Identify the features that make metadata high quality
- Understand the role of controlled vocabularies and metadata standards in metadata creation and management
- Evaluate best practice in metadata creation 
- Create study level metadata for your own research

This course mainly focuses on what metadata is and how we _use_ metadata in research. In the next course, Foundation (which will be available shortly), we will look at _creating_ metadata.

## Who's this course for?

This course is for anyone who will be engaging with research data as part of their work, for example using, analysing or collecting research data.

This course may be particularly relevant for ...
- Masters and PhD students
- Researchers
- Data stewards and data managers
- People working for funding bodies of academic research
- People working in policy areas that use data and academic research in their work


## What level of information do I need to know before starting the course?

You don't have to have any previous knowledge or training in metadata in order to do the Introduction course. As we'll explore in the course, we use metadata in many areas of our lives already often without even realising it. So, even if this is the first time hearing the term, you have most likely engaged with metadata already.

You may already know about metadata and have done some training. This course aims to solidify knowledge around key concepts of metadata.

## How do I take the course?

The Introduction course is split into 10 units. These are...

- [**Unit 1.1 Research data**](<1.1 Research data.md>) - 1 hour 
- [**Unit 1.2 Research data management**](<1.2 Research data management.md>) - 1 hour 
- [**Unit 1.3 FAIR**](<1.3 FAIR.md>) - 1 hour  
- [**Unit 2.1 Introduction to metadata**](<2.1 Introduction to metadata.md>) - 2 hours 
- [**Unit 2.2 Metadata in the research lifecycle**](<2.2 Metadata in the research lifecycle.md>)- 1 hour 
- [**Unit 2.3 Using metadata: discover data**](<2.3 Using metadata%3A%20discover data.md>) - 1.5 hours 
- [**Unit 2.4 Controlled vocabularies**](<2.4 Controlled vocabularies.md>) - 2 hours 
- [**Unit 2.5 Metadata standards**](<2.5 Metadata standards.md>) - 2 hours 
- [**Unit 2.6 Creating metadata: study level**](<2.6 Creating metadata%3A%20study level.md>) - 1.5 hours 
- [**Unit 2.7 Introduction Summary**](<2.7 Introduction summary.md>) - 30 minutes 

If this is your first time engaging with metadata, we recommend working through the units chronologically so you can build on your understanding.

If you already have a strong understanding of metadata, you may only want to dip in and out of units to refresh your knowledge or address any gaps in your learning.

## Terminology

As the way we understand and use metadata is evolving, it's important to note that some terms may be used differently by people or disciplines. The way some concepts are defined in this course may be different to how you currently understand them. So you have a clear understanding of the course content, we'll define key terms and concepts as we go along. 

To maintain a level of consistency in our definitions, where possible we will refer to the [Research Data Management (RDM) Terminology Bank](https://vocabs.ardc.edu.au/viewById/685) developed by CODATA. We may also provide further definitions from other sources to give a more rounded description of a concept.

The RDM Terminology Bank is a community reviewed, cross-discipline vocabulary that defines key concepts in research data management (RDM). As it is regularly updated, it reflects the latest understanding of RDM and aims to offer a single source of truth for terms that can be used in different ways. You can access the [RDM Terminology Bank here](https://vocabs.ardc.edu.au/viewById/685) and we recommend having this open while you go through the course so you can look up any terms that may be new to you or you want to clarify.

## Starting the course

If you're starting the course from the begining, head to unit 1.1 where we'll unpack what research data is and what it's key features.

>[!NOTE]
> Should we include a glossary for the course?
> HM - I don't have a strong opinion on this, but I can see it being benfical as a quick reference/resource. Might be important becuase of the range of audience. If we want to link the words in the text, then we could link to existing glossaries e.g. the CLOSER Learning Hub or CODATA Research Data Management Terminology?<br>
> HM Is it worth flagging in the intro that this course mainly focuses on using metadata? It might be useful in distinguishing between this and the foundation. <br>
> HM Should we include something about AI? I think it's important to flag how important metadata and qusality data are in LLM/AI. We could add a paragraph when talking about benefits?


