---
title: Unit 2.7 Introduction summary
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed
date: November 05, 2025
---
# Unit 2.7 Summary

## Unit overview

### Unit study time

- 30 minutes

### Intended Learning Outcome
By the end of the unit, you will ...

- Identify the key takeaways from the Introduction Course
- Explain the main benefits of metadata for data owners, data users and research as a whole
- Identify tools that help metadata creation and management
  

>[!NOTE]
>HM - Potential key messages/takeaways (we should make sure they are clear throughout the course) e.g. <br>
- Metadata is key to reseach data managament and trustworthy reusable research <br> Y
- Creating metadata early in the reserach life cycle and consistently saves time and improves quality <br>
- something about standards and/or FAIR? <br>
- Something about sustainable reserach and reducing waste? <br>
- Metadata is not a nice-to-have, it is an asset that can be expoilted to your advantage
  
## Defining metadata

> Data about data. Defines and describes the characteristics of other data. It is used to improve the understanding and use of the data. - CODATA RDM 2025

In contrast to other forms of data documentation,  metadata is that it is **machine readable** and **machine actionable**. 

## How is metadata used in research 

Metadata is essential for good research data management and for creating trustworthy, reusable research. In order for research to be resuable, we need to be able to discover and understand data.

**How does metadata support research data management?**

<details> 
<summary>Metadata and research data management</summary>
<p></p>
Metadata helps us manage our data during the research process. By capturing, file formats, versioning and provenance of the data as we go along, metadata documents the research process clearly. It enables us to organise our data and make sure it's secure, reducing the risk of losing data or accidentally allowing restricted data to be accessible. As such, metadata improves our research data management, making our data more trustworthy and helping us preserve it for future use. It may also be needed as part of a funding or journal requirement as evidence of data sharing and well managed data.

</details> 

**How does metadata help us discover data?**

<details> 
<summary>Discovery</summary>
<p></p>
Metadata powers data catalogues which are a key discovery tool in research. On these sites, a large number of studies are listed so people can find past studies for their own work, whether to reference or to use as secondary data. Without metadata, we wouldn't be able to search or filter these sites, intstead we would have to scroll through hundreds of pages and click into every individual record to find studies that relevant for our work. As metadata is machine readable and machine actionable, it helps organise all the studies on a data catalogue and provides us with the data to filter and search.
</details>
  
**How does metadata help us understand data?**

<details> 
<summary>Understanding</summary>
<p></p>
As a structured form of data documentation, metadata gives the context of a study. It explains the who, what, where, why and how of the data. Without this, we wouldn't know what data a study has collected or, if we have the study's dataset, we would struggle to interpet the data as it would just appear to be numbers or text with no meaning. By providing extra information that wouldn't otherwise be captured in the dataset, metadata helps researchers understand how the data was produced and how to interpet the data once they have the dataset. 
</details> 

**How does metadata help us reuse data?**

<details> 
<summary>Reuse</summary>
<p></p>
By helping people discover and understand existing research, metadata helps people reuse existing data. Without metadata, we might not know a study in our area of interest has been conducted and we run the risk of duplicating research. By making these studies findable and understandable, metadata to helps us resue data, saving us time, money and resources.

A dataset created for one research question might also contain data valuable for a completely different enquiry. This may not be obvious when reading about an overall study however metadata, such as variable descriptions, makes these connections visible. People can then identify these opportunities and repurpose existing data, meaning we maximise the potential of data.By documenting the provenance of data, metadata helps maintain the credibility and trustworthiness of data so it can be used reliably to support other research enquiries. 
</details> 

**How does metadata make our data FAIR?**

<details> 
<summary>Metadata and FAIR</summary>
<p></p>

Metadata is a key part of making data FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable). When we talk about FAIR data, we usually think about only about the data itself, but the metadata also needs to be FAIR. If your metadata is well-structured and follows FAIR principles, it makes your data easier to discover, understand, and reuse, giving you and others the full benefit.

</details> 

<details> 
<summary>Findable</summary>
<p></p>
<b>Findable</b><br>
Metadata describes your research, from the study level (e.g. title, author, location) to the variable level (e.g. variable name, data type, unit of measurement). It includes persistent identifiers (like DOIs) linked to a study or dataset. By making your metadata findable, you make your research findable.
<p></p>
You can make your metadata findable by depositing it in a data or metadata catalogue. This makes it searchable on these platforms, allowing people to find it. You also need to store your metadata to be structured and stored in a machine readable format, such as XML, JSON or CSV. If it's not, machines will not be able to process and action your metadata meaning people will be less likely able to find it.
  
</details> 

<details> 
<summary>Accessible</summary>
<p></p>
<b>Accessible</b><br>
Metadata specifies the access conditions (open or restricted) and protocols (HTTP, FTP, API) of your research data. It also provides license information so users know how they can use your data. This ensures that your data is both accessible and secure.
<p></p>
You can make your metadata accessible by ensuring that your metadata is available even if you have closed data. By being publicly accessible, researchers know the dataset exists and how to request access.

</details> 

<details> 
<summary>Interoperable</summary>
<p></p>
<b>Interoperable</b><br>
By describing your data in a structured way, metadata makes your research interoperable with centralised systems like data and metadata catalogues. If we had unstructured free-text desciption of our research, data and metadata catalogues wouldn't know how to process the information. This means your research can't be integrated into these systems and it would be hard to compare your research with other studies as there is no clear structure to follow.
<p></p>
You can make your metadata interoperable by ensuring your metadata is structured and standardised where possible. Sometimes data and metadata catalogues provide you with schemas you can follow, ensuring you capture the necessary metadata in the correct way. Using controlled vocabularies further help you create interoperable metadata by providing standardised terms that are widely available. This reduces the risk of different studies using different words to mean the same thing. 
<p></p>
You can also follow metadata standards which define how metadata should be organised and provide consistency in the terms you use. This means you will be able to compare and exchange metadata with any study that uses the same standard as you. The power of a standard increases if more people use it as more studies become interoperable. So, even if you're not planning on depositing your metadata to a data or metadata catalogue, following a metadata schema and/or standard can help you implement a clear structure for your metadata and make it interoperable for future use.

</details> 

<details> 
<summary>Reusable</summary>
<p></p>
<b>Resuable</b><br>
As people can find and understand your research easily with metadata, metadata encourages the re-use of data. It provides the context behind a study and let's you know how to interpret data. By capturing the data's provenance, metadata increases the trustworthiness of data so it is more likely to be re-used in new studies. Moreover, if your metadata is interoperable, your study can be effectively compared to other studies, allowing people to build new research enquiries from multiple datasets.

As metadata outlines license and usage for data, it informs people how they can use their data.

</details> 

Creating sustainable research 


---

## Why create metadata?

Metadata is not a nice-to-have, it is an asset that can be used to your advantage, making your data go further and maximising the potential of research. It may also be required by funders or research insitutions.

**Why create metadata for your own data?**

Metadata helps you manage your data in a consistent and structured way. This is useful during the research process to make sure your keep your data secure and correctly organised. It can also help you in the future when you return to a previous study after many years as metadata can give you the context and information to understand your data and how it was collected so you don't have to rely on memory.

Moreover, if you're sharing your data, metadata makes your data easier to find, understand, and reuse by other people. For example, by having metadata, your data can become findable on platforms such as data catalogues and repositories. Strong provenance metadata can also help people trust your data, as your research processes are clear and transparent. This means your data is more likely to be cited and re-used, increasing your visibility of as a researcher and the impact of your research.

**How does metadata help you use other people's data?**

In the same way metadata helps people find our data, it can help us find other people's data. This is particularly important when finding secondary data or conducting research to see what studies have already been conducted in our area. Robust metadata helps us understand a research project quickly as well as assess whether it's relevant for our needs. If the project has rich metadata, for example information describing the variables within the dataset, we can even find data we can use within research studies we didn't think were relevant at first glance. 

**Who might require you to create metadata?**

Metadata plays a key role in FAIR data, a standard to which the research community are working towards. As such, funders, insitutions or journals may require you to create metadata as part of your research.




## When and how to create metadata?

