---
title: Unit 2.5 Variable metadata
collaborators: Becky Oldroyd, Sarah White, Jon Johnson, Kate Reed, Hayley Mills
date: April 29, 2025 updated February 2026
---

# Unit 2.5 Variable metadata

!!! example ""

    **Unit study time**
    35 minutes

    **Intended Learning Outcome**
    By the end of the unit, you will be able to ...
    - Identify standard variable metadata elements
    - Describe how variable metadata supports reuse and cross‑study analysis.
    - Document variable metadata for a simple dataset.
    - Recognise how value representations and valid ranges influence interpretation.


Variable metadata was defined in the 'Introduction to metadata' training course - please refer back to this for a refresher including definitions. In short, variable metadata describes how a single variable is defined, represented, collected, and stored in the dataset.

## Why create variable metadata?

If you were presented with the following information...

>The dataset contains the variables:
>- f_n
>- h
>- b_d
>- m_s

Would you have enough information to be able to assess whether the dataset is of interest to you before you pay to access it?
<p></p>
Similarly, imagine this is a dataset you created 10 years ago and you're returning to see if it contains useful data for a new project. Would you remember what the variabels f_n; h; b_d; m_s mean?
<p></p>
What information would you need in order to be able to understand the example dataset and its variables?
<p></p>
<details>
<summary><b> Variable metadata</b></summary>
<p></p>

In order to understand the variables, you will probably need information on the following questions...

- What do the abbreviations mean?
- What type of data did you collect for the variable?
- How was the variable measured?
- How was the variable data collected?
- What was the unit of study?
- How much data was collected for each variable?
- What are the valid inputs for the variable data?

>[!NOTE]
> BO - I've changed "each data" to "each variable" here "How much data was collected for each data?". Should "What are the valid inputs for the variable data?" be "What are the valid inputs for the variable?"

Variable metadata provides the information to answer these questions. 

</details>



If we didn't have information about the variables, we would have to decode what the variables mean and what type of data they collected. If it is our own data, this may include working back through legacy files to remember how the research was conducted. If it is other people's data or an external person is trying to understand your data, we would have to contact the data creator in order to clarify what the variables mean and the type of data. If information about the variables isn't available, the dataset is less trustworthy, and as such, would less likely be re-used.

What are the benefits of variable metadata?

<details>
<summary><b> Benefits of variable metadata</b></summary>
<p></p>

**Personal benefit**
By having a clear record of what variable abbreviations mean and the type of data collected, metadata allows you to manage your data during the research process. It also helps your future self when you return to your data, allowing you to quickly understand your dataset and potentially re-use it. 

**Re-usability of data**
With variable metadata, people get a broader and more comprehensive picture of what data exists in a dataset. So, even if a variable is not a focal point of the original research project or publication, another person may find this variable and re-use it in their secondary research. Moreover, by knowing what variables a research project contains, researchers may be able to make cross-study comparisons that they did not know would be possible if they were only working from catalogue and dataset metadata.

If you're sharing your (meta)data, variable metadata can also help the **discoverability of data**
Variable metadata is sometimes used by data catalogues as part of their search and filter functions. For example ...
- [UKDS Variable and question bank](https://discover.ukdataservice.ac.uk/variables)
- [ICSPR Social Science Variables Database](https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/web/pages/ICPSR/ssvd/)
- [CLOSER Discovery](https://discovery.closer.ac.uk)

They also provide information about the variables directly on these sites, allowning people to interact with variable metadata in a straightforward way.

</details>

>[!NOTE]
>SW - Perhaps add the 'variable metadata' points above as a grahic inviting people to click on various 'clouds' etc to reveal each thing they would need to consider
>KR Really like this idea. Again, unfortunately due to the functionality restrictions of github/the website we won't be able to do it in this iteration. Perhaps we can discuss how we can use the drop down boxes and/or static images to emulate some of this interactivity <br>
>HM the link to SSVD defaults to a differnet page? I've corrected the descriptions of the sites



In the rest of this unit, we'll go through variable metadata elements and look at what information to capture for each. 





## Variable Identification

First of all, you need to describe and define the variable itself. Identification metadata helps users understand what the variable is and how to recognise it. This includes...

**Variable name**<br>
This is the term used for the variable in your dataset e.g. f_n, h, b_d, m_s

**Variable label**<br>
A short, clear label describing the variable, explaining any abbreviations in the variable name e.g. f_n = first name

**Variable description**<br>
A longer explanation of what the variable measures. Sometimes this includes information about conditions of the data collected (e.g. first name, **no nicknames**'), how the variable was collected (e.g. '**self-reported** biological sex') and what measurement was used (e.g. 'height calculated to **nearest cm**'). Add enough detail so that someone new to your research can have an understanding of the variable. If you are using software packages to manage your variables, be aware that many of them impose a character limit on variable descriptions. It is therefore important to keep descriptions concise and focused. Do not include full question text or lengthy instructions here, as these belong in the question metadata and will be held elsewhere. This will be disucssed furhter in the metadata relationships unit. 

For our example dataset above, we could create this variable metadata.

| Name | Label          | Description          |
|------|----------------|----------------------|
| f_n  | first name     | Full legal first name, no nicknames
| s    | sex            | Self-reported biological sex
| h    | height         | Height calculated to nearest cm
| b_d  | birthdate      | Date of birth yyyy/mm/dd
| m_s  | martial status | Self-reported marital status




## Variable data descriptions

Next, you need to describe how data appears in the dataset. It tells users and computers what kind of information the variable contains and how to interpret it.

How we describe data may vary across different projects, depending on what type of data is collected and the level of specificity you want to capture. It's ok for you to have your own way of describing your data, however, it is important that you stay consistent in your descriptions and each metadata element has a clear purpose and defined list of allowed values.

**Value representation**

Value representation describes how the data is represented, this could be text, numeric, date, codelist, scale, geographic, symbol. Documenting this metadata helps interpret the data correctly in analysis.

For example:
- Height: numeric (e.g. 156cm)
- First name: text (e.g. 'Laura')
- Date of birth: date (e.g. '2011-03-05')
- Martial status: codelist (e.g. '1' = single, '2' = married)

**Code lists**<br>
Code list were explored in the previous unit. Here we will add more detail for codelists as value representations. While question-level codelists describe the response options shown to the participant, variable‑level codelists describe how those responses are recorded and represented in the dataset. These may differ as the variable-level code list may have addtional processing, for example:
- a category may be collapsed or expanded during data cleaning
- extra codes may be added for “Don’t know”, “Refused”, “Not asked”, etc.
- the question may allow for an "Other" response in addtion to the categories provided, which may be coded
- the question may allow multiple selections, but the dataset stores derived variables

Documenting this codelist is essential for interpreting the variable correctly, understanding missingness, and enabling others to reuse the dataset. A code list may appear in both places, and may be the same, but the metadata role is different. Documenting this codelist is essential for interpreting the variable correctly, understanding missingness, and enabling others to reuse the dataset.


**Data type**

Data type provides information about how the data appears in the dataset. This helps us to understand how to transform or merge datasets without errors.

For example, we've already described the variable 'height' as numeric in the value representation. What else could we specify about the numeric data?<br>
- It will only contain **positive** numbers as you can't have a minus number for height
- In this dataset, the height variable data only contains **whole numbers**, not decimals
- In which case, we can call describe the data type to be **positive integer**. However, if the data did contain decimal points, for example 178.5cm, we may describe the data type for height as float.
<p></p>
For 'date', the data is written in [ISO 8601 format](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000) and you can use the data type column to specify this.
<p></p>
For the variables 'sex' and 'marital status' the code list is expressed as whole numbers in the dataset. So we would put 'integer' as the data type. Alternatively, if the codes were expressed as 'm', 'fe', 'othr', 'ns' (rather than 1, 2, 3, 4), we would put the data type as 'string'.
<p></p>

| Name | Label          | Description                         | Value representation | Data type   |
|------|----------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|
| f_n  | first name     | Full legal first name, no nicknames | text                 | string
| s    | sex            | Self-reported biological sex        | codelist             | integer                        
| h    | height         | Height calculated to nearest cm     | numeric              | postive integer                       
| b_d  | birthdate      | Date of birth yyyy/mm/dd            | date                 | date [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000.)                          
| m_s  | martial status | Self-reported marital status        | codelist             | integer                          


>[!NOTE]
>SW - 1. value representayion for code list values - yes I would put as numeric data type (because value representation makes it clear its a code list. 2. I think we should give guidance on being consistent rather than allowed/not allowed because metadata capture might be slightly different for different fields of study. BO?
> KR I think this a really good point, thank you. I've added text to stress prioritising consistency while also showing how we draw on DDI / CVs to help implement consistency in our descriptions. With that in mind, I have drawn on the descriptions and values specified by in DDI metadata standard


**Unit of measurement**

Once you have described the variable as it appears in the dataset, it's important to include extra contextual information so we can interpret the data further. For example, for height, we know the data is numeric. However, if the unit of measurement wasn't in the variable description, we wouldn't know if these numbers indicate metres, centimeters or millimeters. The variable description is an open text field and so may not contain this information, so it's imporatant not to rely on this to cover other metadata. 

The unit of measurement is simply the unit used to express the quantity or magnitude of the object you're measuring. 
For the example dataset...
- The unit of measurement for the variable **height in this example is centimetres**. However, unit of measurement will not be applicable to some variables such as first name or marital status. In these cases, you can put N/A.

Documenting unit of measuremnt can prevent incorrect comparisons (e.g., mixing cm and inches). 

In order for research data to be suitable for analysis, it is best practice to use _one_ unit of measurement per concept. For example, the variable data for height shouldn't be recorded as 1m 78cm as this would mix two units of measurement, metre and centimetres. So even if the data was collected in this way, we should transform the data into one measurement unit, e.g. 1.78m _or_ 178 cm, keeping the one-to-one relationship between concept (height) and measure (m _or_ cm).


**Valid range**

Valid range outlines the allowed values for this metadata element. Documenting this helps identify invalid, erroneous, or out-of-range values and supports automated quality checks.

For the example dataset ... 
- For height, you may want to set permitted values to be between 55 - 220 (depending on the population you are collecting data from).
- If the example dataset only collected data from living adults, you could set a valid range for birthdate as 1910-2007.
- For text, you may want to specify how many characters are permitted and set a valid range of 1-50 characters.
- For variables using codelists (sex and marital status), you could include a reference to the codelist you are using so people can reference the permissable codes and their meanings (we will look more in depth into codelist metadata in unit 2.4)


| name | label          |  Value representation | Data type       | Unit of measurement | Valid range   |
|------|----------------|-----------------------|-----------------|---------------------|---------------|
| f_n  | first name     | text                  | string          | N/A                 | 1-50 characters      
| s    | sex            | code list             | numeric         | N/A                 | CLsx_01                           
| h    | height         | numeric               | postive integer | cm                  | 55 - 220                       
| b_d  | birthdate      | date                  | [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html#:~:text=Therefore%2C%20the%20order%20of%20the,27%2018%3A00%3A00.000.)  | N/A                 | 1910/01/01-2007/01/01                          
| m_s  | martial status | code list             | numeric         | N/A                 | CLms_01                                         


## Variable provenance 

Provenance describes where the variable data originated, how it was collected, and whether it has been transformed. Provenance information increases transparency and improves the trustworthiness and re‑usability of research data. The provenance of a variable relies on additional metadata which is provided around the variable, rather than held in the variable itself. Links can be provided to this metadata rather than duplicated here. This was briefly described in the questions and measurment unit and will be raised again in the metadata relationships unit. 

In terms of what provence is recorded at the variable level, this may include information on any processing or derivation applied after collection. This may include...

**Derived (Y/N)**
Indicates whether the variable was directly collected or created from one or more other variables through recoding, calculation, or transformation.

**Derivation**
The logic or algorithm used (can include a formal expression or natural-language description).


## Variable statistics 

Once we've described the type of data and its parameters, we can  give an overview about how complete, valid, and reliable the data values are. This can help identify issues and make decisions about whether the variable is suitable for analysis for your research. They also support transparent reporting and future reuse.

**Missing value code**<br>
It is useful to include the missing value code for a variable so you can identify where there are gaps in the data. The specific code used in the dataset to indicate that no valid data was recorded (e.g., -999, .). Recording this code ensures that users can correctly identify missing data and avoid treating these values as meaningful numbers.

**Number of rows or cases**<br>
The total number of records for the variable. By stating the number of cases for variable, you are able to capture the size of the dataset and identify variables that may be  incomplete.

**Invalid cases**<br> 
As the valid permissable range for a variable was outlined earlier, you can identify a number of invalid cases. The invalid cases should also include cases that contain other errors that mean the data should not be considered when drawing conclusions. From that you can calculate the number of invalid responses.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - An example might be helpful here "should also include cases that contain other errors that mean the data should not be considered when drawing conclusions"

**Valid cases**<br>
Through subtracting invalid cases from the number of cases, you can calculate the the number of valid cases. This is can help us understand how effective a research process was and whether further investigation into how data was collected is needed. For example, if there is a comparatively high number of Invalid Cases to Valid Cases, we will probably have to look into the trustworthiness of the data before we draw conclusions. Equally, it can point to areas that you could potentially improve you data collection processes.


| Name | Label          | Missing value code        |Number of cases           |  Invalid cases                | Valid cases                |
|------|----------------|---------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------|
| f_n  | first name     |  -999                     |186                       |4                              |182 
| s    | sex            |  -999                     |186                       |4                              |182    
| h    | height         |  -999                     |186                       |7                              |179
| b_d  | birthdate      |  -999                     |186                       |0                              |186
| m_s  | martial status |  -999                     |186                       |1                              |185

>[!NOTE]
> To double check, you do not calculate missing value codes in your number of cases total?

**Sub‑Universe and missingness**<br>
Variables created from conditioned questions will have structural missing values for respondents who were not eligible to answer. These missing values reflect the sub‑universe defined at the question level, and are not data quality problems. Recording sub‑universes helps interpret valid cases, missingness patterns, and comparability.

>[!NOTE]
> BO - a lot is covered in this unit so I think a short summary would be helpful



